Mutability of Metadata
======================

These notes were initiated by DV with responses by RW and MJ around 17
December, 2010.

Need a couple of methods internal to the CN to allow efficient updating of
mutable content, which includes SystemMetadata and the Node Registry.

Update of system metadata is required so that CNs can keep track of content as
it is replicated around the place between nodes.

Update of registry is required on a fairly frequent basis for tracking node
status and synchronization and other operations.

::

  bool updateSystemMetadata(Identifier pid, newSysMetaDocument doc)

or perhaps a more granular approach::

  String updateSystemMetadataProperty(Identifier pid, propertyPath path, String newValue)

pid = the identifier of the object for which sys meta is to be updated

path = simple xpath statement identifying element or attribute to update

newValue = the new value to set (assuming everything is a string)

returns previous value


We could generalize this a bit::

  stringList updateMutableObject(Identifier pid, UpdateStatementList updates)

  UpdateStatementList = list of

    path
    new value

Robert's Notes:

We decided not to use XPath as a means for editing Metadata. 

The rest interface must have a way inwhich to allow memberNodes and Clients to
submit changes to the SystemMetadata.

For now we will just implement a separate update REST call on metacat such
that a metacat controlled document can be updated without its PID being
changed. However, this will need to change in the future. Possible other
solutions involve Java RMI or Java JMX. (due to the inherently restrictive
nature of Java RMI, may that will be the preferred method)

We need to consider the System Metadata schema as a packaging xml document.
The System Metadata type will have three groups, an Immutable group, a
Provenance group and a Mutable group. The root element has several 'general'
elements that are considered immutable. They are considered immutable because
membernodes or clients may not alter these elements. These elements may be
represented as the SystemMetadata header complex should we wish to explicitly
nest and typify them.

The new nesting element is being proposed to typify and group provenance
information. The provenance complex type will contain two sub-elements origin
and derivation. origin complex type element will contain two children,
submitter and originMemberNode, that are immutable. The derivation complex
type element contains mutable elements. Not that the derivation type can be
used as a root element itself.

All of the mutable elements are types that can be themselves serialized as
DataONE messages (or they are represented as root elements). They can be
submitted by MemberNodes or clients.

The Immutable grouping:

    1) identifier element

    2) dateUploaded element

    3) dateSysMetadataModified element (may be modified by cn interal system processing)

    4) objectFormat element

    5) size element

    8) checksum element

    9) replica complex type (may be modified by cn interal system processing)


The Provenance grouping & complex type(contains both mutable and immutable types

    1) origin complex type (Immutable)

        a) submitter element
        b) originMemberNode element

    2) derivation complex type (Mutable)

        a) rightsHolder - element
        b) authoritativeMemberNode - element
        c) obsoletes -element
        d) obsoletedBy -element
        e) derivedFrom -element
        f) describes -element
        g) describedBy -element
        
The Mutable grouping (may be modified by Cns, Mns or Clients)

    1) replication policy complex type
    2) access control complex type
    

REST API::

  PUT /meta/pid (token, pid, derivation | replicationPolicy | accessControl) -> Types.Identifier

CRUD Api  (Methods Overloaded or named separately??? assuming named separately???)

internal only::

  CN_crud.updateSystemMetadata(token, pid, systemMetadata) -> boolean

externally available through REST API::

  CN_crud.updateSystemMetadataProvenance(token, pid, derivation) -> boolean
  CN_crud.updateSystemMetadataReplication(token, pid, replicationPolicy) -> boolean
  CN_crud.updateSystemMetadataAccessControl(token, pid, accessControl) -> boolean

Matt's modification of the notes from Robert above:
---------------------------------------------------

I think we need a slightly different set of groups of system metadata
elements, which I outline below, and which then lead to a different set of
services. Each group should be defined in its own freestanding ComplexType. I
don't think we should have a general service for modifying system metadata
that is externally accessible, but rather should have a separate method for
each system metadata group so that access to the services can be controlled
independently.

The Identity group (immutable, set at time of create() call)
    1) identifier element
    2) dateUploaded element
    3) objectFormat element
    4) size element
    5) checksum element
    6) submitter element
    7) originMemberNode element

The ObjectStatus group (mutable by CNs only):

    1) dateSysMetadataModified element (may be modified by cn internal system processing)
    2) replica complex type (may be modified by cn interal system processing)

The Policy group (mutable with changePermission [maybe 'changePolicy'] permission by CNs, MNs, Clients):

    1) AccessPolicy complex type

        a) rightsHolder - element (NB: this needs to be added to AP schema)
        b) authoritativeMemberNode - element (NB: this needs to be added to AP schema)

    2) ReplicationPolicy complex type

The Provenance group (mutable by Clients/MNs):

    1) obsoletes -element    (requires 'write' permission, set at time of update() call)
    2) obsoletedBy -element  (requires 'write' permission, set at time of update() call)
    3) derivedFrom -element  (requires 'write' permission, set at time of update() or create() call)*
    4) describes -element    (requires 'write' permission, set at time of update() or create() call)*
    5) describedBy -element  (requires 'write' permission, set at time of update() or create() call)*
    
\* There is a case to be made that these 3 elements should be settable by any client, but the problem comes in determining who can change values that someone else wrote (i.e., Joe says X describes Y, can Jane then say 'Y describes X' or other contrary statements, and who can delete Joe's assertion?)

The Overall SystemMetadata object would contain elements for all of these
groups, so thet getSystemMetadata() returns all of this information. Updating
system metadata would be done with the following calls:

Internal CN APIs (not accessible to MNs and Clients)
----------------------------------------------------

::

  CN_crud.updateSystemMetadata(token, pid, systemMetadata) -> Types.Identifier
  REST API: PUT /meta/pid (token, pid, SystemMetadata) -> Types.Identifier

External CN APIs (accessible to any caller with appropriate credentials)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

::

  CN_crud.setAccessPolicy(token, pid, AccessPolicy) -> boolean
  REST API: PUT /access/pid (body containing token, AccessPolicy) -> boolean

  CN_crud.setReplicationPolicy(token, pid, ReplicationPolicy) -> boolean
  REST API: PUT /replication/pid (body containing token, AccessPolicy) -> boolean

  CN_crud.setProvenance(token, pid, Provenance) -> boolean
  REST API: PUT /provenance/pid (body containing token, AccessPolicy) -> boolean

-robert's response: I don't think we have a boolean return type. Everything we
return needs to be serializable.

I was attempting to keep 

    6) submitter element
    7) originMemberNode element

as part of the provenance group. It is information more appropriate to the
provenance of an object than the identification of the object. Hence, i broke
provenance into two parts, one mutable, the other not.

Otherwise, it reads well.
