DataONE Cybersecurity Plan
==========================

:About: This document forms Appendix C of the `DataONE management plan`_, version 3.0

.. _DataONE management plan: https://docs.dataone.org/member-area/documents/management/project-management-plans-pmp/


General Principles
------------------

Cybersecurity for DataONE is predicated on the fact that DataONE is a
collaboration of researchers, data providers, institutions, coordinating
nodes, member nodes, data collections and other infrastructure components. As
such it is inherently a virtual organization. DataONE as an entity spans many
organizations and administrative domains. The goal of the cybersecurity in
DataONE is to protect the infrastructure that those organizations and
administrative domains contribute to DataONE as well as the data collections
and the DataONE user community. DataONE, as a virtual organization, will
naturally need to accommodate the highly variable security regimes that are in
use in its various partners. In planning for cybersecurity in this
environment, a layered approach must be used. Each DataONE entity must
simultaneously meet requirements of its local institution and must also
integrate into the DataONE cyberinfrastructure. DataONE is also a mixture of
operational systems to accept and deliver scientific data and research
endeavors to improve the overall data management lifecycle. The cybersecurity
management for DataONE will need to be flexible enough to support the very
different needs of research and operations. The cybersecurity posture of
DataONE will evolve over time both because of continuing maturation of DataONE
operational strategies and because of an ever-evolving cybersecurity
landscape.


DataONE Institutional Components
--------------------------------

DataONE consists of several types of components both in terms of humans,
systems, institutions, and organizations. This section is a brief summary of
those components and their DataONE roles in terms of cybersecurity:

**Scientific Researchers**

DataONE will host data and provide access to data for science researchers.
DataONE will frame appropriate data curation policies as part of Partnership
Agreements with Member Nodes. Data integrity must be maintained throughout the
data life cycle when managed by DataONE.

**DataONE staff and team members**

DataONE funded staff will operate DataONE resources and develop DataONE
software and tools in accordance with DataONE cybersecurity policies and the
policies of their home institutions. DataONE coordinating nodes: A critical
part of the DataONE physical cyber- infrastructure will be located at the
Coordinating Nodes. These components will be operated within the current
acceptable policy environments of these host institutions. In addition, these
resources must meet the requirements for DataONE nodes.

**DataONE member nodes**

All data collectively managed by DataONE will be located at the member nodes.
These components will be operated within the current acceptable policy
environments of these host institutions. In addition, these resources must
meet the requirements for DataONE nodes. Member nodes will vary in terms of
size, sophistication, and current and future management that will be
accommodated. Specific organizational data security policies and practices
will be adhered to within DataONE in the process of sharing data through or
within the DataONE network.

**DataONE data collection owners/contributors/stewards**

Data aggregated in DataONE will, in many cases, be delivered by or derived
from existing datasets. The obligations and expectations of DataONE and these
collections sources will be documented in Partnership Agreements by the
involved organizations/institutions.

**DataONE data collections**

One of the key goals of the cybersecurity plan is protecting the integrity,
availability and confidentiality of the data collections managed by DataONE.
DataONE will develop the necessary policies, practices, and processes to
insure data are properly protected and available only to those permitted
access. 

**Research organizations that generate long-lived data**

DataONE will engage with data creators to host, replicate, and/or curate data
collections. DataONE will use appropriate Partnership Agreements to specify
how these activities will occur, including cybersecurity agreements.

**Research Libraries**

DataONE will engage with research libraries both as contributors of data
provided by DataONE and as institutional users of DataONE digital data
services. Appropriate Partnership Agreements will be created and executed in
order to understand the agreed levels of mutual service between DataONE and
research libraries. Educational Institutions: DataONE will view educational
institutions as users and outreach and education opportunities. DataONE will
engage with institutions and their students as individuals or a group to
define user access rules and acceptable use policy

**Standards Bodies**

DataONE will use several data and computing standards both for operations and
as cybersecurity policy and plan guidelines.

**DataNet Partners**

All DataNet awardees will, in concert, develop appropriate uniform approaches
to data management and curation for the DataNet program. DataONE cybersecurity
policies and posture will need to be compatible with DataNet guidelines.

**The U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF)**

DataONE and DataNet project and program sponsor. DataONE is responsible to NSF
for cybersecurity operations and any Foundation specific policies or
practices.


Institutional Cybersecurity Requirements
----------------------------------------

Cyber-infrastructure resources in the form of data collections, access
methods, data storage, and computational resources will need to operate within
the established operational envelope of home institution of each DataONE
component. In many instances this will be an institution of higher education
where the operational envelope is defined by the institution in a process that
may vary from informal to quite formal. In addition, some DataONE
cyber-resources will originate within US agencies where FIPS and other NIST
standards will need to be applied in order to receive a formal authorization
for operations. Future DataONE cyber-resources will be located at institutions
under foreign government institutions, where the governing laws, policies, and
social practices may have significant differences from those at US
institutions. In each instance, the home institution’s policy environment will
be recognized and observed where possible. Where the home institution’s
policies are not compatible with DataONE needs, home institution policy
exceptions will be sought and obtained or we will find some other mechanism to
address the incompatibility.

Cybersecurity requirements will originate from the requirements of the data
itself, primarily in the form of maintaining data integrity, but also
availability and, in some cases, confidentiality.


DataONE Wide Cybersecurity Requirements
---------------------------------------

In addition to the home institutions policy frameworks, DataONE resources as a
collective entity will have an overlay cybersecurity framework that will
integrate the diverse home institution policies in order to achieve DataONE
goals. Specifically, DataONE will:

  Initiate a DataONE cybersecurity coordination group. This group will help
  develop and implement policy at all DataONE components. In general, this
  policy will be guided by generally accepted best practices and is expected
  to establish a set of base requirements and a means to map those
  requirements to common frameworks (such as NIST and FIPS documents). This
  policy will also provide a framework for the consistent application of
  common policy guidelines, such as FIPS 199 information security
  classification, by providing more specific examples of terms and
  applications within the DataONE context.

  Develop cybersecurity language (or appropriate pointers to such language)
  within Partnership Agreements in order to document agreements and expected
  service levels between DataONE and its fundamental entities:

  - Users

  - Data contributors 

  - Coordinating nodes 

  - Member nodes 

  - DataONE staff at sub-awardee institutions 

  - DataONE Collaboration and Public web presence

  - Document DataONE uniform operational requirements and best practices as
    appropriate

  - Develop a DataONE-wide incidence response playbook, including a point of
    contact at each DataONE component.

  - Analyze the emergent behavior issues that, from a DataONE-wide point of
    view, are highly important to DataONE’s success. Such issue will include,
    among other things: data integrity and availability; data access control;
    and federated identity.

  - Develop an incident sharing mechanism and policy among DataONE components,
    including real-time data sharing and available, sufficiently secure
    communication means for during an incident.

In this fashion, DataONE will attempt to create an integrated cybersecurity
environment that meets its needs while not being overly burdensome.

DataONE Cybersecurity Planning Posture Progression Through Project Lifetime
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The DataONE cybersecurity plan and subsidiary documents are living efforts.
They will be reviewed and potentially revised annually. In addition, annual
assessments will focus on parts of the cybersecurity environment where issues
or improvements can be made either because of identified vulnerabilities of
because of evolving cybersecurity issues.

Cybersecurity Milestones in DataONE Project Year One
----------------------------------------------------

The DataONE cybersecurity coordination group will be constituted. It will
consist of the deputy director for operations, selected CCIT members,
leadership team representation, working group leads from the Federated
Security group, and other members as appropriate. This group will:

- draft a charter and get it approved as a project document

- Develop DataONE security policies for coordinating node, member nodes, and
  data collection providers as part of their DataONE Partnership Agreements

- Develop DataONE acceptable use policy and appropriate user access
  acknowledgement format

- Draft the initial DataONE cybersecurity plan. 

- Plan for annual assessment and revision to include, for example, a DataONE
  wide security incident response contact list and a DataONE wide security
  incident playbook

Approval Workflow
-----------------

This section is the initial cybersecurity plan for DataONE. Its approval
process is via the DataONE leadership team and PI. This initial cybersecurity
plan is part of the overall DataONE project management plan. Future annual
revisions of the cybersecurity plan will be via a standalone document that
will be drawn from this section of the project management plan.
