DataONE Overview
================

There are three major components in the DataONE infrastructure: Member Nodes
which represent data repositories, Coordinating Nodes which serve data
management and discovery services, and the Investigator Toolkit which contains
a variety of end user tools for interacting with the infrastructure.

Participation in the DataONE infrastructure as a Member Node or by using the
Investigator Toolkit (i.e. implementing or utilizing DataONE service
interfaces) enables several fundamental services to be available upon which
additional infrastructure, services, applications and communities may be
built. These core, community building services include:

- promotion of data preservation through automated replication of data and
  metadata

- support for arbitrary globally unique identifiers with guaranteed resolution

- extensible search and discovery services

- federated management of user identities and access control

Member Nodes are primarily existing data repositories (e.g. Dryad_, the
`Knowledge Network for Biodiversity`_, `ORNL DAAC`_) that already fill an
important role in their respective communities supporting data management,
curation, discovery and access functions. Existing or new repositories can
participate in the DataONE infrastructure by implementing a simple set of APIs
(Application Programming Interfaces) which represent a convergence of
functionality expressed in a variety of existing systems. These APIs include
basic operations such as listing and retrieving objects, support for creation
of content, and the ability to generate low level system metadata describing
the various objects (data, metadata) exposed by the service. Member Nodes may
implement a subset of the full suite of :doc:`Member Node
APIs</apis/MN_APIs>`, and in this way participate in the network with minimal
effort (e.g. as a "read only" data source). Member Nodes that implement the
full suite of APIs will be able to accept data from other Member Nodes which
in turn assists with data preservation by ensuring multiple copies of all
content are available, thus reducing the risk that content will be lost or
inaccessible if a Member Node should go offline.

Member Nodes may eventually number in the thousands as progressively smaller
repositories come online, perhaps even to the level of individual labs
deploying their own Member Node to take advantage of the broad infrastructure
enabled by DataONE.

Coordinating Nodes implement critical services through the
:doc:`APIs</apis/CN_APIs>` that enable identifier resolution, data
preservation, data discovery, and supplement the federated identity system.
Coordinating Nodes replicate all content between themselves, an in doing so
create a small set (3-6 nodes) of geographically and institutionally isolated
systems that ensure ongoing operation of the infrastructure should any
particular node be inaccessible. Coordinating Nodes maintain complete copies
of all science metadata (detailed descriptions of science data objects and
collections) and system metadata (low level metadata describing the type,
size, ownership, and locations of data and) and index this information to
enable data discovery services.

Investigator Toolkit is a suite of software libraries, tools, and applications
that support interaction with the DataONE infrastructure through the
:doc:`REST</apis/REST_interface>` service APIs exposed by the
:doc:`Coordinating</apis/CN_APIs>` and :doc:`Member</apis/MN_APIs>` Nodes. Low
level libraries are initially available in Python and Java which assist
application developers to take advantage of the core services exposed by
DataONE participants. For example, an R plugin has been developed using the
Java library. Enabling this plugin within a R script enables discovery,
retrieval, and storage of content directly in the DataONE infrastructure.
Similar extensions are being developed for workflow tools such as Kepler,
VisTrails and Science Pipes to enable interaction with the core DataONE
services.

The :doc:`implementation roadmap</implementation/roadmap>` of DataONE targets
an initial public release of the core cyberinfrastructure towards the end of
2011, with considerable emphasis on stable implementation of the core
services. At that point, the infrastructure will support content replication,
identifier resolution, content discovery and retrieval, and a significant
proportion of the federated identity infrastructure. The Investigator Toolkit
will contain several components widely used by the community, and at least six
significant data collections will be participating as Member Nodes. Several
relatively minor subsequent releases will provide incremental enhancements to
core capabilities. Additional Member Nodes will be progressively added to the
infrastructure as resources permit- some repositories may have resources to
independently implement the necessary APIs, others may require assistance from
the DataONE development team.


.. _Dryad: http://datadryad.org/

.. _Knowledge Network for Biodiversity: http://knb.ecoinformatics.org/

.. _ORNL DAAC: http://daac.ornl.gov/

.. _NBII Metadata Clearing House: http://mercury.ornl.gov/clearinghouse/

